are the stories from the road of an
automotive diagnostic robot from the
future to discover new problems and new
vehicles and to go where no other robot
has run before robo tech was called to a
shop to perform a program reflash on a
2006 ford e-250 van with a 6.0 liter
engine this is a task I am asked to do
on a daily basis there are many shops
that do not make the investment to
purchase a programming interface or to
subscribe to automotive manufacturer
websites to download programming files
this may be due to the fact that they
may not get enough calls for
reprogramming to justify the cost or
they may not want to expose themselves
to the liabilities involved in
reprogramming there are many precautions
that must be observed while programming
a vehicle the most important one is
having the proper battery charger such
as the computer controlled power supply
this device will maintain a uniform
voltage in the battery under different
load conditions caused by power
consumption changes during reprogramming
as when cooling fans or even headlights
come on in the process if system voltage
falls out of range during reflashing the
programming procedure could be aborted
with a possible loss of a controller the
other dangers are the loss of the
internet connection a scandal running
out of power or vehicle cabling
disconnections any of these malfunctions
will result in the loss of a new control
module that cannot be returned if it is
corrupted in the reprogramming process
the tech upper shock provided me with a
service bulletin he found to resolve a
code p 061 be internal control module
top calculation performance and a
drivability problem in the form of a
throttle response issue this is common
practice today with all the resources
that are now available to text either
through subscription
from different after market information
companies or directly from manufacturer
websites to verify the complaint I
hooked up the Ford factory scan tool to
view the codes stored in memory there
were no codes stored because the shock
technician hadda raised them all this is
something many technicians do without
realizing that if someone else were to
get involved with the vehicle there is
no longer any information left behind to
aid in the diagnostic process I
proceeded with reprogramming to provide
him with the latest updates available
from Ford for this vehicle I then
started the vehicle but it did not run
very well and the check engine light
came back on when I went back into the
codes menu the same code p 061 be had
reappeared in memory the software update
i installed addressed this code but the
software update did not resolve this
vehicles issue at this point the tech
knew he had made a bad decision to opt
for reprogramming as a cure for the
problem but it is not uncommon for this
to happen there are many times when
there are software updates intended to
address particular issues on a vehicle
but this should be the last step to take
after you have exhausted all other
possible causes of the problem today I
had arrived as a software Robo salesman
only but it was now the shops choice to
allow me to take off my salesman's hat
and put on my diagnostic hat code P of
61 b deals with any correlation issues
between the throttle position sensor and
the mass air flow sensor the engine had
a hard time leaving up and it was
blowing a lot of black smoke out of the
tailpipe it was being over few old the
most common cause of this condition
would be a mass airflow sensor out of
range I needed to verify mass airflow
operation by doing some simple data
integrity checks I placed the mass
airflow puppy m and TPS parameters in a
graph mode to view what the ECM was
seeing looking at date of
parameter values changing in a digital
format is not what human beings would
prefer to do unless you're a
number-crunching pro graphing signals is
a major asset to diagnostics because it
gives a technician the visual
associations between values over time to
help Peter see what is happening viewing
the graph you could see that the mass
air flow was well out of range at 129
grams per second at a given value of
1371 RPM with only a 26-percent throttle
opening it was a no-brainer as to why
the vehicle was running so rich that it
was blowing black smoke this vehicle had
a mass airflow sensor that was out of
range or was it ford says that if you
encounter a code p 061 be you should
inspect for an improperly sealed air box
or air filter which can result in an
accurate measurement by the air flow
sensor in addition ford claims that if
water or snow contacts the hot wire
element of the mass air flow sensor it
may cause a spike in air measurement
this is all good information so at this
point I needed to dig into the filter
housing to check the integrity of the
sensor assembly and its connector feed
circuits prior to throwing a new mass
airflow sensor at the problem when I
pulled the air cleaner cover off I was
surprised to see part of the air filter
missing the rocket cone-shaped then I
inspected the mass air flow sensor and
was shocked to see the missing air
filter rocket cone jammed into the mass
airflow inlet I removed it from the mass
airflow housing to clear the passage put
the air cleaner housing back in place to
prevent any cross flow air from passing
over the sensor and started the engine
now it ran like the powerful Triton it
claimed to be i rechecked my data graph
and could now see that the mass air flow
sensor reader normal 25 grams per second
at 2489 RPM and at about a twenty
percent throttle opening this poor
engine had a serious breathing
the air filter speeding rocket cone had
an adhesive failure flipped over got
sucked through the filter element and
jammed itself into the mass airflow
housing this created a venturi effect
and allowed a rush of air to flow past
the mass airflow sensing element which
skewed the sensor signal this is a rare
thing to happen but it teaches us two
lessons beware of cheapo off-brand parts
and always check the basics before you
move on to reprogramming or any other
high-tech procedures this robot will now
power down for a recharge will I dream I
don't know see you next time